[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: One of
the biggest archaeological
controversies of the past
several years has been
the authenticity of what are
called the Bosnian pyramids.
Those in academic circles
have been calling it a hoax.
The problem is, all
but a few have not
taken the time to go
to the site to examine
the evidence for themselves.
But we did.
The man who took it upon
himself to begin the excavation
is Dr. Semir Osmanagich,
a scholar in Mayan history
and a native to Bosnia.
When we met with Semir,
we were in for a shock
and became the first
media in the world
to learn of what is now believed
to be the oldest pyramid to be
discovered, by many
thousands of years.
The implications are such
that this discovery may
call for a complete rewrite
of our human history.
Join me now in
Bosnia with Semir.
Semir, it's so good
to be here with you.
And it was absolutely marvelous
being out in the tunnels,
just to get that incredibly
clean, fresh air in our lungs.
What's interesting
about this story
to me is if anyone
right now watching this
were to go onto the internet
and start researching
Bosnian pyramids, one
of the first things
that's going to pop up
is Bosnian pyramid hoax.
You know?
It's a hoax.
And yet clearly, once someone
takes the time and trouble
to come here,
there's not a hoax.
And you've been dealing
with this since 2005.
And let's talk
about how-- first,
there are a lot of
little pyramid--
several pyramid-looking
mountains there, right?
How did you first
become alerted enough
to go to the trouble
to start excavation?
And tell us about
your background a bit.
>> SEMIR OSMANAGICH: First
of all, welcome to Bosnia.
>> REGINA: Thank you.
>> OSMANAGICH: I've been
dealing with the pyramid science
for about 25 years now.
My PhD is in Mayan
studies, which
means that I spend a lot of
time in the jungles of Honduras,
Guatemala, El Salvador,
Belize, and Mexico.
I've seen hundreds and
hundreds of pyramids
in forests, completely covered
by soil and vegetation.
250 pyramids in China, also
completely covered by soil.
So I realized that
the pyramids are not
all like the ones on Giza
Plateau, in a desert,
visible to everyone.
Then the next thing, you realize
that Egyptian pyramids are not
built as the tombs
for the pharaohs.
No hieroglyphic writings.
No symbols.
No tools.
No organic materials.
No mummies.
Then you ask yourself, hey,
if the pyramids are not
only native to Mexico
but all over the planet
on all six continents,
what was their purpose?
And obviously there
was a communication
on global level
thousands of years back.
So once I've seen and written
about so many pyramids,
I came to Bosnia in
the spring of 2005.
They invited me to come to this
central Bosnian town of Visoko,
only 20 miles northwest--
>> REGINA: When you say "they"
invited you, who invited you?
>> OSMANAGICH: The director
of the local museum.
They wanted me to
see the local museum.
I came there.
But once I saw that hill
towering the town, which is now
known as the Bosnian
Pyramid of the Sun,
even though it was covered
in forest and soil and dirt,
when I saw the geometry--
four sides, triangular
faces, the same slope on
all sides, obvious corners--
I took the compass to my hand.
I put it in front of me.
And the compass showed me
that the sides perfectly
matched the cardinal points,
east, west, north, and south.
And that's exactly
how the pyramids
were built in China,
the oldest one in Egypt,
in Peru, Cahokia pyramids
in the state of Illinois.
So I knew that it was an
artificial structure, covered
by soil after
thousands of years.
And then I decided to start
the project of investigation.
I was hiring the
core drilling drew.
Then I was ready to
write my first book
about the discovery
of Bosnian pyramids.
That was October of 2005.
I announced the
news to the world.
And thousands of people
wrote me in emails.
They wanted to be part of it.
They wanted to do the support.
>> REGINA: I remember when
it came out in the mainstream
news.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH: And at
that time I said, well,
this is not a one-man show.
This discovery
belongs to everyone.
I established
nonprofit foundation.
And ever since, we got the
umbrella for this huge project.
And the last seven
years, from 2005 to 2012,
it has become the most
active archaeological site
in the world, every year
500, 600 volunteers coming
from all continents
to little Bosnia,
the country that was
known for the war
and the violence and
corruption, all the bad stuff.
But now with this project,
we talk about archaeology,
about tourism, about
volunteers, about nice stuff.
So we want to change the
image of the whole country
for the better.
So you did mention
discovery and how
it was received by
mainstream media
and the cultural establishment.
Unfortunately,
all the professors
of archaeology, history,
geology here locally in Bosnia,
instead of supporting
the project
or at least trying to
become a part of it,
trying to do their
part in the research,
they decided to attack us.
They were writing petitions
trying to stop the project.
But fortunately, the
Bosnian prime minister,
the Bosnian government who
came to the site, they said,
hey, we have some
artificially made blocks.
We have a lot of tourists.
This is good for country.
So just keep working
on this project,
and don't worry about
the jealous scientists.
>> REGINA: Now, you told a
story off-camera when we were
in the tunnels the other day
about one of the journalists--
I think he was an
archaeologist here in Bosnia--
went on the camera
and had a book.
Can you tell that story to try
to dismiss the fact that this
may be a genuine discovery?
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
What we had, we had
history professors here.
And they were showing
these encyclopedias
written in the 1960s.
And he was saying,
well, in this book
we have all the
archaeological sites in Bosnia
and the former Yugoslavia.
On this site, we don't
have Bosnian pyramids.
Therefore, they don't exist.
Now, the book was written
40, 50, 60 years ago.
Now, is it possible
that you have
all the archaeological
sites in the books?
Of course not.
Then it would mean
that everything
has been discovered already.
Where is the place
for the science?
So we have to stay open for
the new discoveries always.
It doesn't matter
what position we have.
It doesn't matter how we are.
We simply need to be
ready for new discoveries.
And then, and only then,
there is a hope for us.
>> REGINA: In all ways
we have to remain open.
But what's interesting
to me in this is here
you have a country that
has been so ravaged by war.
I mean, when you look outside,
the one startling feature
driving through Sarajevo
is there are cemeteries
everywhere.
And there are a lot
of new headstones
from the 1990s and the war.
You lost a good percentage
of the population.
So you would think, given that,
with something so amazing right
in the backyard here, that the
Bosnian establishment would
welcome the thought that there's
something new to be discovered
and to bring people
in to examine.
I don't understand this mindset.
>> OSMANAGICH: That's
the common sense.
And a matter of fact,
the common people,
they do support the project.
But then when it comes to
the cultural establishment,
they have their own interests.
And some of them, like the
local historians, geologists,
archaeologists, they do not
even realize that they were just
the tools from
some elite centers.
And basically they were
doing the dirty job,
trying to stop this project.
>> REGINA: Now,
did some of them--
certainly they must have come
out to examine some of this
for themselves.
>> OSMANAGICH: Most of
them, even though they live
in Sarajevo, which is only
20 miles from the site,
they never came to Visoko.
But they claim, oh,
we know the terrain.
We did some research.
There is nothing there.
I mean, what's wrong about it
to come and see for yourself
and say, hey, maybe I was wrong.
Let's continue
with the research.
Unfortunately, sometimes
the ego is just too big
and doesn't let you do
your scientific work.
>> REGINA: Especially if it's
going up against what you have
already established yourself
in and your own reputation
in in the world of science.
>> OSMANAGICH: Unlike any
other archaeological or even
scientific project, here we try
to view the results from three
realms, from physical--
based on the physical senses
and physical science--
energy, and spiritual.
They're the only way to
understand the structures, not
only in Bosnia but a lot
of ancient structures.
And then we approach
the whole project
with the good intentions.
For a lot of scientists,
it doesn't mean anything.
For us, it means
a lot because when
you go to the ancient
sites, you don't
want to disturb
certain entities.
And I think it's helping us to
bring a lot of positive energy.
And then this
project is so unique
that even in naming
the pyramids,
we named one the
Pyramid of Love.
That was one of the reasons
why some of the archaeologists
were attacking me,
saying, why is he
giving such romantic
names to the structures?
Why didn't he name it Structure
Number 25, for example?
They don't realize that the
words are very powerful.
And the most powerful
one is the word "love."
So when you assign the word
"love" to huge structure,
the idea is that that word
colors the whole valley
with such positive
feelings, feelings of love.
And these are type
of the messages
that we wanted to send out to
the world, messages of love.
>> REGINA: So the world
of archaeology is--
you're going up against
the current dogma.
You're also going up
against the notion
of a crossover between
science and spirituality,
which it seems to me talking
just here and there with some
of the people in Bosnia,
there's quite a lot of heart.
There's an innate
understanding of spirit,
and people understand this.
So it would only makes sense.
You're Bosnian.
You're from this land.
It would only make
sense that you
would be able to tap
in and really feel
these energies and the
importance of bringing spirit
back along with just the
hardcore analysis of strata
and soil samples
and all of that.
>> OSMANAGICH: And
a matter of fact,
this discovery will change
so many other things,
not only on a local
but on a global level.
So far we thought that the
pyramids were the pharaohs'
tombs, or they were places to
do some ceremonial sacrifices
on Mexican soil, and so on.
This is so wrong.
It has to be changed.
By changing that,
basically you're
changing the current
scientific paradigm.
The discovery of
Bosnian pyramids,
being the first one and
the biggest one in Europe,
means that you're not adding
just one little chapter
in the history books.
Because Bosnian
pyramids being probably
the oldest means that when
you change the beginning,
everything else that
follows has to be changed.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> OSMANAGICH: So you
need to rewrite the books.
The PhDs are no good.
Professorships either.
The way professors
teach our kids,
all that has to be
changed from little Bosnia
to Croatia, France, UK, US.
It was much easier for them
to control this project
and try to stop it, stop
this little foundation,
this little guy.
But unfortunately
for them, we know
that the truth is on our side.
We have noble goals
in front of us.
And that's the reason why
we're going to succeed.
We opened this
project for everyone.
No elite science here.
No selection of
information here.
>> REGINA: Anybody
can go in there.
>> OSMANAGICH:
Anybody can come here.
As a matter of fact,
we are the only one
that offered this opportunity
to anyone to come up here,
but to come to volunteer
to work with us to be
an active part of discoveries.
I mean, you cannot just go
like that to Egypt or Mexico
and start digging
or join their teams.
I mean, you have to
belong to certain circles.
You have to be checked out.
And then, and only then, you can
go there but without talking.
In our case, no secrets.
>> REGINA: No, I see people
coming up with their--
>> OSMANAGICH: It is an
interaction between volunteers,
experts, media,
visitors, guests.
We are so open.
And you could see the
smiles of the volunteers
in the Sun Pyramid
and the tunnels.
People work hard five,
six, seven hours,
but they always have smile on
their face because they know
they are part of
something so very--
>> REGINA: It's a very
happy-looking lot.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
So 10, 20 years
from now, they will
be talking to their
kids or grandchildren.
Hey, I was there
in the beginning.
I did my part.
>> REGINA: That's
what strikes me.
Because it's so
accessible, anyone
can drive up to that tunnel.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
>> REGINA: And you go in for
just the equivalent of maybe
a donation of a couple dollars
or something to help with
the process of the digging,
just some of the basic supplies
and taking care
of your brochures.
And anyone can go.
A family comes
up, and they start
talking to you or someone else
and take their kids in there.
There's no block.
There's no big permissions.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
>> REGINA: It's so available.
>> OSMANAGICH: To the
left, there is a tunnel.
To the right, there
is another one.
Of course, we have to make
sure that everything we do
is per our project
documentation.
You need to get the
permits from the country.
>> REGINA: You've got to
have your safety hats on.
>> OSMANAGICH:
Yeah, safety hats.
We need to make sure
nothing happens there.
But then on the other
hand, we are so open
and we are so different.
So I think this is
the future of not only
archaeological excavation but
any other scientific projects.
Why secrets?
>> REGINA: Involve people in
their own intelligence and let
them decide for themselves,
and also their own intuition.
And beyond intuition
now, I want to get
into the hardcore science of it.
There are five
basic factors that
are involved in
deciphering whether or not
something is a genuine pyramid.
Just run through
those really quickly,
and then we'll get
to the science.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
So if you want to call
something a pyramid,
we have to have geometry.
Usually it's four sides,
triangular faces, corners,
the same slope.
That's what we have in the
case of Bosnian pyramids.
The second are the orientation.
The old pyramids in
China, 250 of them,
are oriented built
to the cosmic north.
The oldest, the biggest
Egyptian pyramids, north.
Peruvian, Cahokia, north.
So far we've thought
that the best orientation
is the northern side of
the Great Pyramid of Egypt,
with an error of zero
degrees and two minutes.
>> REGINA: It's so precise.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
But in our case, the State
Institute for Geodesy
came to the top of the
Sun Pyramid in Bosnia,
measured it, and concluded that
the error to the perfect north
is zero degrees, zero
minutes, and only 12 seconds.
>> REGINA: More precise
than the Giza pyramids.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
It's just a fraction
of one minute.
This is the most precise
orientation ever on the planet.
The element number
three, you have
to have artificial
construction material.
In Peru, they use adobe bricks.
In Guatemala, they're shaped
through cutting stones.
In Mexico, limestone.
In Egypt, limestone and granite.
In Bosnia, what they did,
they made concrete blocks.
This is our archaeological
trench number 4C.
We have removed approximately
one meter of layers of soil.
And then we
discovered the blocks.
This was the first
one to be discovered.
The blocks, which is rectangular
in the shape, four and a half
metres in length, one and a half
in width, 45 centimeters thick.
It has seven tons,
or 16,000 pounds.
It does have flat top, break
at 90 degrees, flat side,
break at 90, flat bottom.
Six flat sides and six
breaks at 90 degrees.
When they were
building the tunnels,
they dug out stones,
pebbles, rocks.
They got the clay
as a binding agent.
They mixed everything, and
they pulled the concrete blocks
on the top of the Sun Pyramid.
The element number
four, inner passageways.
Our friends, geophysicists
and the georadar specialists
from Germany, Russia,
Austria, and Serbia,
they did prove that there is
a network of inner passageways
and chambers inside
the pyramids.
The element number five,
underground tunnels.
You have to have
underground tunnels
as part of the
whole construction.
We hit a wall here in 2010.
It was completely closed.
And then we hit another wall.
We removed the walls.
We removed the free material.
And after four or five
hours, we could see the hole.
We removed more material,
and then for the first time
we found two open
sections, one to the left,
45 meters, one to the
right, 200 meters.
>>CREW: Opened?
>> OSMANAGICH: Open.
So you have construction
and structures
above and below the ground.
So we have a big
master plan when
they started building
the whole project.
In the last seven years,
we have spent 300,000 hours
on archaeological digging,
sample analysis, test analysis,
and radiocarbon datings.
And then we concluded
that in Visoko we
have valley of
pyramids consisting
of five pyramids which
we named the Bosnian
Pyramids of the Sun, Moon,
Dragon, Earth, and Love.
Three pyramids,
Sun, Moon, Dragon,
they form perfect
equilateral triangle
when we connect the
tops of these pyramids.
The distance between them, 2,170
meters, or one and a half mile.
So this is something
that we can consider
a sacred geometry,
perfect triangles.
There is another one
within the bigger one,
the tops of the Love,
Earth, and the river,
another equilateral triangle.
So people did a master
plan before they
executed the structures.
And finally, the
element number seven
is also important, the water.
You have to have water
above the ground,
underground water streams.
You always have the water.
You see the lake is about
150 square feet of surface
and about a couple
of feet in depth.
Can you see the water there?
>> REGINA: Oh, that's
the reflective surface.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes,
that's the water.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH: When
the pyramid works,
it acts also as a water pump.
It sucks the water.
The water circles everywhere.
So these are very interesting
not only structures,
but as we proved here in
Bosnia, they're machines.
Namely, on the top of the
Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun,
we had four independent teams
at four different times,
physicists and
electrical engineers,
the experts in
energy phenomena who
were doing the measurements.
And what they concluded was that
on the top of the Sun Pyramid
they were able to
detect and measure
the energy beam,
electromagnetic field coming
from the pyramid in the radius
of 13 feet of 28 kilohertz
frequency.
Now, this is a
frequency which is not
readily available in the nature.
So, I mean, you need a machine
to generate this frequency.
And then the second
energy phenomenon
that we measured over
there was the ultrasound
beam, about 30
feet radius, coming
through the top of
the Sun Pyramid.
Again, the frequency
28 to 33 kilohertz.
So since these frequencies
cannot be made by Mother
Nature-- you have
to have machine--
the logical conclusion is the
Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun
isn't only a structure;
it is an energy machine.
And then once you
have the machine,
then you can have
those engineers
trying to explain how
the machine works.
So what we were doing
in April of 2012,
we brought about 600 pounds
of equipment-- generators,
oscilloscopes,
gaussmeters, laptops.
For 54 hours, we were emitting
the electromagnetic field
from our generator
to the pyramid.
So now the physicists said, OK,
if you have one energy machine,
you have another one, you
emit electromagnetic field,
basically you can
predict what is
the strength of
the signal you're
going to get back
from this machine.
>> REGINA: From the resistance.
>> OSMANAGICH: From
the pyramid, yes.
And they said it
will be 0.9 volts.
But what happened
is that the signal
back, which was
over three volts,
it was more than
three times stronger.
Now, the physicists
could not believe.
So what we have here,
not only that the pyramid
acts as the energy
machine, but it's
saying that this is
an intelligent energy
machine deciding how to react.
So very interesting.
So we are opening a completely
new door into science.
>> REGINA: And this
is very difficult.
Now, when you make a
statement like that,
that's where the tools
don't work anymore.
>> OSMANAGICH: You are right.
>> REGINA: In measuring it, when
you talk about consciousness
and intelligence, now there's
no measurement just yet.
>> OSMANAGICH: You are right.
You know that almost
100 years ago, Einstein
said everything is
energy in nature.
Our planet is energy ball.
We are energy balls.
The trees are energy.
But also the pyramids.
The stones is energy.
The pyramids are very old
and powerful energies.
So eventually they got the
consciousness of their own.
And that's the reason why
we are getting such results.
So like I said, the only way
to understand these structures
and these ancient
monuments is to view them
through three realms: physical,
energy, and spiritual.
>> REGINA: And just the sheer
intelligence it took to create
these and what was put into
there for purpose is part
of the construct, the field of
intelligence of it, as well.
>> OSMANAGICH: You are right.
You know, sometimes
we think that we even
don't have enough
scientific tools developed
to understand this project
and these monuments.
I mean, of course we
have some to kind of get
to electromagnetic fields,
ultrasound, and so on.
But how can measure
Orgone, the life energy,
some other types of
more important energies?
And it seems that the ancient
beings, the ancient builders,
knew how to manipulate so
many types of energies.
And that was the main
purpose of the pyramids
and the main purpose of
the underground tunnels.
And we have tens of miles under
the Bosnian pyramid complex,
most for the energy to flow.
Got the map of the
underground labyrinth,
the entrance, tunnels.
We do clean just a few tunnels.
Most of them, we
keep them sealed.
Tens of miles of underground
tunnels and chambers
and underground
water accumulations.
So somebody was
able to manipulate
with the huge
quantities of material.
And always the purpose
was about the energy.
Klaus Dona, the great
researcher from Austria,
in 2011 at our
scientific conference
brought the georadar
readings of the Sun Pyramid,
proving that you have tunnels on
seven different levels or seven
different depths, anywhere
from 15 feet to 1,000 feet.
And every level is kind
of a little bit moved.
So it creates a spiral.
>> REGINA: Yes, and
I wanted to get--
>> OSMANAGICH: Spiral
is extremely important.
When you have this energy
flowing through tunnels,
getting through the pyramid,
going through the spiral,
it is a base to
generate the scalar
waves, the non-Hertzian
technology.
>> REGINA: Scalar waves, yes.
>> OSMANAGICH: So
when we measured,
on the top of the Sun Pyramid,
the strength of the signal,
first we put our
instruments on the surface.
It showed certain strength.
Then we lifted about 10 feet.
The strength was higher.
Then another 10 feet.
Again, the signal was stronger.
So the physicists,
again, they could not
understand because
our technology
in 21st century, which we
can call Hertzian technology,
tells us that the
closer to the source,
the stronger the signal.
You move away, the
signal is getting weaker.
But now in Bosnia,
it's upside down.
You move from the source,
it's getting stronger.
So what does that mean?
If that signal is
getting stronger
moving away from the
pyramid, it means
it can reach any
point in the universe.
>> REGINA: It means this has
to be a generator of some kind.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly,
it is a generator.
Now, the pyramid itself does not
generate energy from nothing.
It uses natural
sources of energy.
Of course, one of them is magma
in the core of our planet,
creating magnetic energy.
You have underground
water streams,
and then they
generate energy also.
So the pyramid sucks those
different types of energy,
amplifying them.
Our colleagues from Russia from
Schmidt Institute, Professor
Khavroshkin and
Professor Tsyplakov,
they were able to
measure the signal
on the bottom of a
pyramid-- in Egypt
and in Bosnia-- and on the top.
Their conclusion, the signal
on the top is 50 to 500 times
stronger than on the bottom.
So it tell us that the ancients
knew the power of geometry
and all those waves
created by the pyramids.
>> REGINA: Well, all of this
is absolutely fascinating.
So we've already gone over
some of the background of how
this came to be.
But when you start diving
down into the details,
we start looking
at the construction
of the blocks themselves.
>> OSMANAGICH: Next to
this block is another one.
They are laid out next to each
other, forming the same slope.
And the third one, and so on.
But this is just the
first row of blocks.
Below is the second, and the
third, and then the fourth.
One, two, three, four.
It's not tectonic movement.
It's the work of the
intelligent hands.
The mass is seven
tons, or 16,000 pounds.
Mother Nature does not
make blocks like that.
It's obvious.
Some of the geologists
were saying,
oh, it was the result
of tectonic movements.
Which is, of course, nonsense.
Now, you have
obviously the blocks
that somebody made
in the distant past.
Now, when you see
the blocks, you
can see, on the surface,
different colored materials.
Some of the stones and rocks
and pebbles, they are blue,
they are red, they are green,
they are brown, they are gray,
they're white--
different colors.
In the tunnels, the
conglomerate material
is exactly the same,
different colored material.
Then on those
concrete blocks, you
can see different sizes,
larger pieces, medium-sized,
smaller pieces, sand, the
same thing in the tunnels.
So the connection, direct link,
between the tunnel builders
and pyramid builders is there.
They removed hundreds of
thousands of tunnel materials
to build those
underground tunnels.
What did they do with such
huge quantities of material?
They used every bit of it
to make the concrete blocks.
How do you know that
they are concrete?
We took about 50
samples and sent them
to six different
labs, institutes
for materials in Bosnia,
Italy-- Politecnico di Torino--
and France-- Institute
for Geopolymers,
which is run by
famous scientist,
Dr. Joseph Davidovits.
They all confirmed
the same thing.
This was a man-made concrete.
And they explained
us the technology.
They said besides the
construction material,
the pebbles and
rocks and sand, they
used clay as the binding agent.
A lot of clay around
Bosnian pyramids.
They ground the clay,
mix it with the water,
heat it up to 400
degrees, and then clay
is getting binding properties.
They knew that in ancient
Rome, 2,000 years ago.
But also they knew that
in Bosnian pyramid sites
thousands and thousands
of years before.
So basically they are
pouring those concrete blocks
at the site, which is much
more practical and quicker
than to cut seven-ton blocks
in quarries and then move them.
>> REGINA: That makes sense.
And then also you don't
have debris and, you know,
mountains of debris.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
So now, when it
comes to concrete,
two main properties that
determine the qualities
are the hardness and
the water absorption.
The harder the concrete,
the better the quality.
Our modern concretes
in 21st century
are in the range from 10
megapascals to 60 megapascals.
>> REGINA: What is the name of
that unit of measurement again?
>> OSMANAGICH: Megapascals.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> OSMANAGICH: Now, the samples
from the Sun Pyramid in Bosnia
are in the range from
73 to 134 megapascals.
>> REGINA: So almost
double, double or more.
>> OSMANAGICH: Two or
three times stronger.
Two or three times
better quality.
The second property
is water absorption.
If water can get into
the concrete blocks
during the winter, it
freezes and then it breaks.
So we try to keep the water
absorption as low as possible.
Our standards are up to 3%.
In those samples, the concretes
from the Bosnian Pyramid
of the Sun, the water
absorption is around 1%,
much more superior
to modern concretes.
So obviously in the past you
did have advanced civilizations
who knew how to put
these formulas together
to make such excellent
quality concrete.
So the whole pyramid is
covered with the best quality
concrete on the planet.
>> REGINA: And the
problematic part-- well,
it's not really problematic.
You don't want to destroy it.
But it's very difficult
to drill into.
Didn't you say you
had someone drilling
a certain part you were
trying to get through?
Or what was--
>> OSMANAGICH: Of
course, as a scientist,
we would like to know more
about the inner structure
of the pyramid.
We would like to get inside
to find the passageways
and chambers and so on.
According to some
georadar readings,
we are finding
some of the tunnels
rather close to the surface,
about 15 to 20 feet.
>> REGINA: That's
that one large,
open area where you
can see down inside.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yeah.
So the idea was try to
get into the passageways.
Now we can see two, maybe
even three layers of concrete.
So we were able to
remove the first layer.
Actually, we cut a
small piece, so we
are able to go a
little bit deeper.
But now we got to the second
layer of concrete blocks,
and they are so extremely hard,
you cannot do nothing to them.
I mean, any drill machine
or Hilti or anything,
it simply cannot go through.
Of course, we don't want to use
dynamite or anything like that.
But it will be hard work to
try to get to the pyramid.
But then, no rush in
a project like this.
Eventually we're going to get
it either from the surface
or from the underground tunnels.
>> REGINA: And right now this
is all being done by volunteers.
>> OSMANAGICH: Like we
said, this is a project open
for everyone.
This is excellent experience.
I mean, coming to
another country, meeting
with so many young
people, and those
who are young in their hearts,
from so many countries.
I mean that's
excellent experience.
>> REGINA: What an adventure.
And it is.
It's a wonderful
adventure being here.
So we have this obviously
superior kind of concrete
that's in there.
And we see these big blocks.
And you say they go four deep.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
In some cases, they're like
45, 50 centimeters thick.
You've got four rows.
In some cases,
some of the blocks
are 75, 80 centimeters
thick, and have two rows.
So basically you have
two rows to four rows
of concrete blocks.
Then you have clay and clay.
And the ancients
were very smart.
They were using clay as a
binder but also as a waterproof
material, as the
thermal insulation.
And in the case of
earthquakes, the clay
gives flexibility
to the structure.
It does not collapse.
It breathes.
So concrete, clay, and then
we have sandstone blocks.
And then again we have clay.
And they are all laid out at
the same angle, 35 degrees
to 45 degrees on
the other two sides.
So basically you
have the same slope
from the bottom to the
top of the pyramid.
Some of the scientists, like
some of the Egyptian scientists
from the beginning--
Dr. Barakat,
Dr. Swelim-- thought
that maybe the pyramid
was a natural hill
in the beginning,
so it was shaped by people
to get those four triangular
faces, the perfect
orientation, and then
it was covered by concrete.
But the Russians scientists,
Professor Khavroshkin
and Tsyplakov, using
their instruments,
they proved that
the whole pyramid
is built from the
non-compact material.
If it is not compact,
it means it is not
the result of
millions of years--
>> REGINA: Natural
phenomena, yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH:
--of accumulation,
but it was a huge
construction site.
Of course, the
question is, who was
able to manipulate with 18
million tons of materials?
The Cheops, or the Great Pyramid
of Egypt, 5 million tons.
Here, 18 millions.
Well obviously, the answer is
more advanced civilization.
And that's nothing
to be ashamed of.
>> REGINA: No, not at all.
We have to get over that.
>> OSMANAGICH: If we are not
the most advanced-- you know,
we think that we are
most intelligent,
most beautiful ever.
Well, we are not.
>> REGINA: There you go.
Now, one thing.
You were talking
about the measurements
coming out of the top.
Now, what's interesting is
something else you told us,
is that in Egypt, the
government will not
allow measurements of
these kinds to be taken.
That's one of the
things that's really
I find intriguing and
beautiful about this project.
The government's not
shutting you down.
They're allowing scientists
from all over the world
to come in and analyze.
So we don't know what's coming
out of the Pyramid of Giza
in terms of those--
you say, I think,
it was 28 kilohertz coming
out of the top of this,
but we don't know what's
happening in Giza.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly right.
It's very unfortunate
that you have generations
of Egyptian scientists, people
who run antiquities in Egypt,
they don't let
independent researchers
from all over the world
to come and measure
ancient energy phenomena.
In the late 1960s,
when they were
looking for the passageways
and more chambers
in the second biggest
pyramid, Khafre Pyramid, when
the Japanese scientists
realized that every 10
minutes, the energy field
of that pyramid changes,
the Egyptians threw
them out of the country.
Because they said, we don't
care about the energies.
All we care is to
prove that this
is the result of the pharaohs
of the Fourth Dynasty.
So it is really a shame.
I mean, if you're
a scientist, you
need to look for the answers.
So if you're finding things
like this, like these anomalies,
you need to work on them.
>> REGINA: So let's talk about
the anomalies underground,
because they don't just stop
at what's coming out the top.
>> OSMANAGICH: You are right.
>> REGINA: When you
go into the tunnels--
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
If you have the largest
structures above the ground,
of course they
had to be followed
with the huge structure
below the ground.
In 2005, when I first came
to this town of Visoko,
I wrote in my first
book that we were
going to find the
underground tunnels.
And the whole cultural
establishment attacked me.
They said, what tunnels?
What chambers?
What is he talking about?
Well, seven years later,
turns out that we were right.
Even though we uncovered
about 850 to 900 meters so far
in the last six years, it
is probably just 2% or 3%
of the whole network.
But then imagine 900 meters
of pre-historical underground
tunnels are discovered in
the last six, seven years.
When they discovered
15 meters in Mexico
in Teotihuacan a
couple of years back,
that was the world sensation.
And we've got 900
meters, and we've
got months and months
in front of us.
So under the ground,
approximately 25 meters,
or about 80 feet.
So below the surface there
is this huge network.
It consists of tunnels,
chambers, intersections.
And we can see the traces
of two civilizations--
A lot of carvings
here, as you can see.
Looks like a face with
the eyes and the mouth.
--one who built this
network, and the second one
who came and for
some reason closed
all these tunnels, filled
them in, made those dry walls.
They sealed them.
Why?
It's hard to say at this point.
Look at here.
Here, obviously
we have the wall.
Now, we call this wall dry wall.
Dry wall, it does not have
cement or binding material.
But they are still very compact.
Now, behind the dry wall
we have free material.
And we have a tunnel here.
You see?
>>CREW: Yep.
>> OSMANAGICH: Half-circle
radius-- I mean,
half-circle ceiling here.
So somebody completely filled
in this tunnel with material.
It's not like a couple or
three feet and it's open.
No, they are completely filled
in for hundreds and hundreds
of meters.
>> REGINA: So what
are we talking about,
about sheer amounts of material?
>> OSMANAGICH: We are talking
about tens of miles of tunnels
and chambers, hundreds of
thousands of tons of material.
So whoever was
closing this, they
were able to manipulate with
the hundreds of thousands
of tons of materials
and millions of rocks,
probably from the river bed,
and placing them together.
We can see that somebody had
such brilliant engineering
skills to build a network that
even today, probably 12,000
years plus after it was built,
the tunnels are still there.
They have not collapsed.
Last month, August of 2012, we
had several earthquakes nearby.
And during one of them,
I was in the tunnels.
We could not feel anything.
We got on the surface, people
are asking us, did you feel it?
Did you feel it?
I said, what?
Earthquake.
No.
So after so many
thousands of years,
it's like earthquake proof.
>> REGINA: They're stable.
Now, all of these
massive tunnels
were filled in with
that same loose granite.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
>> REGINA: Which looks different
than the surrounding surface
of the tunnel.
It's crumbly.
It's almost like sand.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yeah, it's
like normal clay and compact
material.
>> REGINA: Yeah, like
very gritty sand.
But it's completely filled in.
>> OSMANAGICH: To
the ceiling, yes.
>> REGINA: To the ceiling.
I'm trying to imagine
with a shovel,
getting it so you have
absolutely no air pockets even.
>> OSMANAGICH: That
would be impossible.
>> REGINA: Impossible, yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH: First
civilization, very advanced.
The second one-- if
it's a second one.
Maybe it was the same
one, but thousands
of years after, also
extremely developed.
They were able to manipulate
with hundreds of thousands
of tons of fill-in material.
How did they move it?
Obviously it was not
neolithic cave men.
How they move it?
How they fill it in all
the way to the ceiling?
I mean, it was not just
laborers and shovels.
Of course not.
>> REGINA: No, it
wouldn't be possible.
>> OSMANAGICH: You have to
have something either under
pressure, like big pipes, and
you fill it up all the way,
and then you build the
walls every few meters,
and that's how they would
complete the sections.
Or they had some other ways.
Maybe all this material
was levitating somehow,
and it was filling
all these pockets.
So we have two big mysteries,
and not a single word
about those civilizations
in our history books.
So when you come up
with something new,
the first reaction of
the mainstream science
is to attack you, to
try to shut you down
because they want to
keep the status quo.
And that's a shame.
>> REGINA: Well, that's true.
But what you've been able
to get through analysis
is that it appears
those tunnels may
have been filled in
about 5,000 years ago.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
>> REGINA: Which is essentially
the same time period that
the Egyptologists
say Giza was built.
Of course, they're
not sure on that.
I mean, there's
a lot of dispute.
>> OSMANAGICH: You are right.
In that fill-in material,
because since they
had to move hundreds of
thousands of tons of materials,
we are finding pieces
of organic material,
pieces of wood and
things like that.
When we analyze, we
go back 4,610 years.
So it is almost 5,000 years.
So it tells us that it was
not a primitive neolithic man
living in this
area, but there was
a civilization very advanced.
Now, being in tunnels--
you were there-- you
could feel how perfect
is the air circulation.
>> REGINA: Oh, the tunnels.
You just want to stay
in there and breathe.
>> OSMANAGICH: Matter
of fact, you go deeper,
you breathe better.
When we have our coal mining
engineers coming through
the tunnels, they cannot believe
what they experience there.
They're saying, well, in our
case, when we go 50 meters,
we lack oxygen.
We need to use the fans,
get the oxygen inside,
get the bottles, and so on.
But in our case, you go deeper,
you breathe better and better.
And only one entrance.
So it's the genius of
these ancient builders.
What they were doing in
order to move the air,
they were making the
ceilings different heights.
So some sections sits rather
low, three, four feet.
Some sections go up
to 10, 12, 15 feet,
then it comes down
and up and down.
It's like a sinusoid.
So when you have
a lower section,
the air pressure is stronger.
When you have higher sections,
the air pressure is weaker.
Strong, weak, strong, weak,
different air pressure, the air
moves.
When you have one long tunnel,
it's like you have one big fan.
When you have hundreds
of tunnels like we do,
you have hundreds of fans.
So no need for
electricity or fans.
Genius.
>> REGINA: Yeah, genius.
And it just feels
sublime in there.
You just want to stay.
This is really just
beautiful energy.
>> OSMANAGICH:
People gets inside,
they don't think about
the worries of daily life.
But inside, they think about
this, they got relaxed.
And in 2010, '11, and '12,
we've had so many testimonies,
people telling us that
they feel so good.
If they had asthma,
once they got out,
asthma, basically they
can breathe normally
without those little pumps.
People who have
headaches or back pains,
those pains are gone.
Allergies, the
allergies are gone.
So something strange
was happening there.
So we wanted to find
a scientific way
to prove why we have the healing
properties of the tunnels.
So what we did, we measured the
concentration of negative ions.
Negative ions kills
viruses, bacterias.
In our cities, in our
offices, the concentration
of negative ions is rather
low, 200 negative ions
per cubic centimeter.
At the entrance of the
tunnel, 1,000 negative ions.
In the first
underground chamber,
approximately 700 feet
from the entrance,
it is 43,000 negative
ions per cubic centimeter.
>> REGINA: No wonder we
felt so good in there.
>> OSMANAGICH: It's 200 times
healthier than what we have
here.
And the second thing,
also very important.
When we live on
the surface, we are
exposed to the cosmic radiation.
Some of them, they are
very bad for our body,
and our body cells
fight those radiations.
There are Hartmann grids,
Curry grids, Schneider grids.
There's underground
natural radioactivity,
underground water that
releases negative energy.
So in our life, it's
so many negativity.
And our body cells, they keep
fighting with those enemies.
We've measured those values
in the underground labyrinth
in Visoko.
No negative cosmic radiations.
Hartmann and other
grids equal zero.
No natural radioactivity.
No negative energy from
the underground waters.
>> REGINA: Now, isn't there
normally radiation coming from
the earth?
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
But in our case, the
radiations are 10 times lower
than the minimum allowed.
So the location of this
place was very important.
And the way they built it, they
built the safest, most secure
place on this planet.
So what's happening now?
Our body cells don't have
the enemies around them,
so they start doing their job.
And their job is to fix
the problems in our bodies.
>> REGINA: Maybe that's
why all the people--
I've seen quite a few
of the people that come
in as volunteers, and they go
in with a hard hat, a shovel,
and wheelbarrows.
This is old-fashioned
excavation.
But all of them look
very radiant and healthy.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes.
>> REGINA: And part of it is
they're doing what they love.
But I couldn't help,
after feeling that energy,
wondering if that might be
some of what's going on.
And yet when I'm
thinking, my mind
keeps going back
to this one place.
You're talking about a
structure that's been filled in.
What must the energy have been
like and the energy emission
been like before the
tunnels were filled in?
>> OSMANAGICH: Some of the
dowsers who come to the place,
they come with their dowsing
equipment, wires, and so on.
When they walk through the
tunnels, they're saying, well,
this tunnel is built exactly
above the energy lines, the ley
lines.
So we always have
energy involved.
So imagine tens of
miles of the tunnels.
You have energy
flows everywhere.
And most of it are
flowing to the pyramid.
>> REGINA: Through
that spiral network.
>> OSMANAGICH: Yes, exactly.
And that's why we have
this focused energy going
through top of the pyramid.
But once we get
back to the tunnels,
obviously, one of the
purposes, maybe main purpose,
is to get enough energy for the
main generator for the pyramid.
But also among some other,
maybe secondary, is the health.
Basically the main
thing in our life
is living healthy
with a prolonged life.
And they made this
underground facility
to say what is the
most valuable to us.
That's the second thing.
Probably there are more.
So it seems whenever they
were building something,
it did have several functions.
Now, with this
energy beam coming
through top of the
pyramid, if you
could reach any other
planet, obviously you
have a communication mean.
Because with energy bridge
between two planets,
you can move the vibrations,
information, and so on.
And then the second
thing, what are we?
We are just the vibrations.
We simply vibrate differently
than this table or this planet.
So there is a way,
technically speaking,
to move objects or our bodies.
So you have a base
for the teleportation.
The third thing, nowadays
when in China or Russia
you have stormy weather,
they have these projectiles.
They disperse those
stormy clouds.
There is a way to
focus this energy beam
and then adjust the climate.
>> REGINA: Well, just like
the Orgone generators.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly right.
Then you can use it for
heating, for healing,
for military purposes.
I mean, our imagination
is our limit.
When you have enough energy,
then you can find a use for it.
>> REGINA: OK, now
we get to, to me,
just the astounding
part of this.
You had more analysis
done on organic material.
And I believe you
said it was trapped
between the outer surface
blocks of the pyramid
and the sand and
everything that's
come over time to
revegetate the area.
And you had that analyzed
because that would tell you
a lot, right?
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
Well, in June of 2012, we had
our first shift of volunteers.
And we asked them to extend one
of our archaeological trenches.
We saw the concrete blocks.
We said, OK, let's go five,
six feet to the right.
So basically they were
removing approximately three
and a half feet of the soil
and the clay and the dirt.
And once they removed
that, we discovered
on the surface of concrete
blocks an organic material,
fossilized organic
material, pieces of wood.
And incidentally we had an
Austrian, Terry Kreuger.
I was there, a couple
of our archaeologists.
And we saw that piece of organic
material, we were so exciting.
We said hey, this
organic material
can give us a minimum
age of the pyramid.
So obviously it was before
this dirt starting, you know,
accumulating and after
the pyramid was built,
after the concrete
blocks were there.
So we sent the samples
to two lab in Europe.
One is in Poland in Gliwice.
The other one is
Kiev in Ukraine.
And we already received
the first results back
from Ukraine.
And exclusively for you guys,
I can give you the results.
The results is 24,800
years, plus/minus 200 years.
So we are going
back 25,000 years.
So this is the minimum age of
the Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun.
>> REGINA: This is astounding.
>> OSMANAGICH: It forever
changes our view of the ancient
history.
>> REGINA: Does it ever.
I mean, when you got
this information back,
were you expecting this?
>> OSMANAGICH: Well, we knew
that it would be more than
12,000 years, more than the
end of the last ice age.
Because from the
very beginning, these
were the type of
information we were
getting from different sources.
For example, if you can figure
out the age of the soil,
then you can say the
minimum age of the pyramid.
And the science that deals
with the soil and its origin
is called pedology.
We had institutes for pedology
from Bosnia, and they came.
They measured the samples of
the Sun and the Moon pyramids,
and they said the
soil is between 12,000
and 15,000 years.
So we already knew that
it will be extremely old.
But once you get such a
hard scientific data showing
25,000 years, of course
it is mind-blowing.
And then when you go
and see official results
for Egyptian pyramids--
4,500 years-- for Mexican,
Peruvian, Chinese,
2,000 to 3,000,
you can say, hey, these are the
oldest pyramids on the planet.
>> REGINA: And people don't
really have a context for that.
I mean, if you listen
to certain circles,
humanity is only 6,000
years old, right?
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
>> REGINA: You go to others who
will say, no, at least 12,000.
Now, some of the
people are starting
to extend out to at
least 12,000 now, even
in the world of science.
And yet, when we think
academically right now,
what would they
say would have been
going on here 25,000 years ago?
>> OSMANAGICH: Of course
they will be shocked.
They were shocked when we said
that the pyramids are in Bosnia
are bigger than
the Egyptian ones.
But it is shock after shock.
>> REGINA: Shock
after shock, yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH: So what?
I mean, we have to
stay open minded.
And then I don't
think that we do
have a real age for the
oldest Egyptian pyramids
or Mexican pyramids or
Peruvian or Chinese pyramids.
You go to China, out of
250 pyramids, 20 of them,
the biggest ones, are
the most superior,
built from granite
and limestone,
and the smallest
from the mud bricks.
We know that the Chinese
emperors did use the mud brick.
But we know that they did not
use the granite because they
did not have tools, so
they are much older.
1967, the Chinese
archaeologist who
deciphered some of the
hieroglyphic symbols
said they are 12,500 years old.
And then they sent him
to the mental hospital.
But we know that
there are information
out there telling us that
some of the older pyramids
are older than the end
of the last ice age.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> OSMANAGICH: So we are
going back to different cycle
of civilization on this planet.
And that's what the elite
don't want us to believe.
They are telling us everything
started with Sumer and Babylon,
Akkad, Assyria, ancient
Egypt, ancient India,
6,000, 7,000 years
ago, and that's it.
Well, that's not it.
That's just the last
cycle of humanity.
Before this one there
was another one,
which was interrupted by
the global catastrophe.
Before that one there was
another one, and another one.
So that's what's happening
on the face of this planet.
>> REGINA: I mean, that
does change everything.
All the books, as you say, once
something like this happens,
everything has to be rewritten.
>> OSMANAGICH: Exactly.
And in science, the
only thing that counts
are the scientific arguments,
lab analysis, test reports,
datings.
And what we have here when
it comes to Bosnian pyramid
project, a lot of people
saying, oh, it's impossible.
Oh, I don't believe.
That's their opinions.
Opinions are irrelevant.
>> REGINA: Right.
But I can't help but think
this has to be major.
You've just told us.
We're the first media
that know about this.
In another few days, you
have a conference happening.
More media is going
to know about it,
and this is going to start
trickling out around the world.
What do you expect
is going to happen
once that finding is known?
>> OSMANAGICH: Once people
start getting this information,
they will start thinking,
hey, obviously it was wrong,
what they were telling us, so
let's try to find the context.
And then they will realize that
all these anomalies, Yonaguni
monuments on the
bottom Pacific floor--
>> REGINA: Graham
Hancock's work, yeah.
>> OSMANAGICH: Lebanon,
huge blocks, 1,200 tons.
The new dating of Mexican,
Peruvian pyramids,
now they are getting
a new context
with the Bosnian pyramids.
And the nice thing
about it, like you said,
we are going to end up
with the volunteers.
Our international summer
camps-- now look at the data.
2010, 500 volunteers,
30 countries.
2011, they came
from 32 countries.
2012, 700 of them, 52
countries and six continents.
That's what we want to do.
We want to give the
power to the people,
the power of information.
Because when there is a
free flow of information,
no need for the
elites and the others.
>> REGINA: And as for who
built it, why they built it,
and what's in there, you
believe there's a secret to be
revealed.
>> OSMANAGICH: There is.
Seven years after, we are
just scratching the surface.
But we do know it was a
more advanced civilization,
and a lot to learn from them.
>> REGINA: Do you feel
that we have matured enough
as a species that we're ready
to know this technology?
>> OSMANAGICH: We will need to
develop spiritually in order
to understand everything, and
then the knowledge will be
given to us.
And so much to learn from
this side and some other.
And then, once we are
ready, we will learn a lot.
We will move ourself
to the next step.
>> REGINA: And I want to see
what the energy is like once
you get this entire
thing excavated.
But as you were saying, you
still need a lot of volunteers.
At this rate, with the number
of people you have right now
and your number of
wheelbarrows and shovels,
it would take about 200 years?
>> OSMANAGICH: 200
years, exactly.
Unfortunately, a lot
of the time, everything
boils down to the money.
We need more money, of course.
We need more, you know, funding.
But even with this stage
with the volunteers,
I'm talking very positively
of what we have here.
I think more people wil
be coming, more tourists.
And finally, people who
are ready to finance
certain commercial projects,
tourist projects, and so
on, and they should speed up
the whole scientific project.
>> REGINA: And the other overlay
to this is there are incredible
technologies that are being
developed right as we speak
that are already in existence
that are already able to look
at it and say, this
is what's there,
and there are some big surprises
still in the future not just
here, all over the planet.
As you say, there are
pyramids everywhere.
But the fact that you've
gone this far on this one,
this gives us a place
to really sink our teeth
into at the scientific
community and the hearts
of the individuals
who want to know more
about our own
history as a species.
And on that note, I want
to thank you so much
for what you're
doing, for putting
all of your love, your passion,
your time, and your energy,
and inspiring all these
incredible volunteers that
are showing up for weeks
and months at a time
to dig for you.
>> OSMANAGICH:
Thank you very much.
>> REGINA: Thank you.
>> OSMANAGICH: OK.
>> REGINA: As with all things,
I would encourage an open mind,
and for the
adventurers among you,
perhaps a trip to a very
special place in the world.
If you're inspired
to contribute,
you can reach Semir through his
website at bosnian-pyramid.org.
Meanwhile, for a
deeper understanding
of the technology
of the pyramids,
you might also
enjoy my interview
with Christopher Dunn, author
of "The Giza Power Plant."
Until next time, thanks for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.